We're sorry but dummies doesn't work properly without JavaScript enabled.
Please enable it to continue.
Articles Books Collections Custom Solutions Home Home, Auto, & Hobbies Articles Sports & Recreation Articles Fantasy Sports Articles Fantasy Football Articles List of Football Penalties (NFL) By: Howie Long and John Czarnecki and Updated: 04-24-2017 In This Article In This Article Introduction Sign up for the Dummies Beta Program to try Dummies' newest way to learn.
By checking this box, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy & to receive electronic communications from Dummies.com, which may include marketing promotions, news and updates.
Sign Up Cancel OK Making sense of the penalties in American football can be tough — unless you have a handy list of common football penalties to refer to as you watch a game.
Here are some brief explanations most common football penalties in National Football League (NFL): List of Football Penalties Penalty Description Penalty Yardage (NFL) Encroachment When a defensive player crosses the line of scrimmage and makes contact with an opponent before the ball is snapped.
5 yards False Start When an interior lineman on the offensive team moves prior to the snap of the ball, or when any offensive player makes a quick, abrupt movement prior to the snap of the ball.
5 yards Offside When any part of a player’s body is beyond the line of scrimmage or free kick line when the ball is put into play.
5 yards Holding (Offensive) When an offensive player uses his hands, arms, or other parts of his body to prevent a defensive player from tackling the ball carrier.
10 yards Holding (Defensive) When a defensive player tackles or holds an offensive player other than the ball carrier.
5 yardsAutomatic First Down Pass Interference A judgment call made by an official who sees a defensive player make contact with the intended receiver before the ball arrives, thus restricting his opportunity to catch the forward pass.
Spot of the foulAutomatic First Down Helmet to Helmet Collision When one player uses his helmet to hit into another player’s helmet.
15 yardsAutomatic First Down Horse Collar Tackle When one player tackles another by grabbing inside their shoulder pads (or jersey) from behind and yanking them down.
15 yardsAutomatic First Down Face Mask When a player grabs the face mask of another player while attempting to block or tackle.
15 yardsAutomatic First Down Roughing the Kicker When a defensive player makes any contact with the punter, provided the defensive player hasn’t touched the kicked ball before contact.
15 yardsAutomatic First Down Roughing the Passer hen a defensive player makes direct contact with the quarterback after the quarterback has released the ball.
15 yardsAutomatic First Down Personal Foul An illegal, flagrant foul considered risky to the health of another player.
15 yards Delay of Game An action which delays the game; for example, if the offense allows the play clock to run out 5 yards About This Article This article can be found in the category: Fantasy Football , From Category Fantasy Football Fun Football Slang: Get a Handle on the Terminology/Terms Football Trivia: Answers to Questions You May Be Too Afraid to Ask New Offensive Plays for Football: Fly Sweep, Run-Pass Option, and Bubble Screen Rules for Football Helmets and Face Masks Fantasy Football For Dummies Cheat Sheet View All Articles From Category Quick Links About For Dummies Contact Us Activate A Book Pin Connect About Dummies Dummies has always stood for taking on complex concepts and making them easy to understand.
Dummies helps everyone be more knowledgeable and confident in applying what they know.
Whether it's to pass that big test, qualify for that big promotion or even master that cooking technique; people who rely on dummies, rely on it to learn the critical skills and relevant information necessary for success.
Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookies Settings Do Not Sell My Personal Info - CA Only
